---
layout: post
title:  "Least I Forget... Covid"
big_image: ""
date:   2021-02-20 10:02:26 -0600
categories: reflection
tags: [long,reflection, covid]
---
<br>
Knowing the brain’s categorical shortcutting, Covid 19 will occupy a chunk of memory distinct from the rest of my life. Before further optimization of my brain space and hence more distortion, I will attempt to reflect on how Covid 19 Pandemic impacted my life and the  mechanisms that I employed to prevent atrophy.<br>
<br>
It was February something, I was in my college databases course, when I first became familiar with the novel virus breaking out in Wu Han, China. What struck me at the time was the shocking civil-rights violations (netting people) and seemingly extreme measures enforced to curtail the spread of the virus. Frankly, if I recall correctly, I was ignorant of the significance of the Corona Virus that was being transmitted.<br>
<br>
<!--break-->
Come March 3rd, 2020, I received news that the conference I was presenting research at,  the Experimental Biology Conference hosted in San Diego, California, was cancelled. I remember my incredulous reaction at the unprecedented precaution, woe me, for this was merely the beginning.  This was only the first domino to fall due to Covid; pretty quickly cancellations would become a fact of life gradually wearing off disappointment. Shortly after this announcement, on Wednesday, the 11th of March, DePauw University released an equally unprecedented statement: students were instructed to return home no later than the 20th. The reception of that email stands out like a flashbulb memory burned into the hippocampus: I was in Roy O’ West Library around 8:00PM when a devastated cry of student’s disbelief erupted on the first floor. I wasn’t processing the information, a form of weak shock numbed my attention, I was focused on maneuvering events with Quinn. I saw various reactions amongst students from wailing to numbness to laughing disbelief. That night, degenerates and academics together all showed up at a local student bar, Wells, determined to drink relentlessly, despite the news… a knack most DePauw students exhibit often.<br>
<br>

Subsequently, life flowed in quick succession, DePauw enacted various stifling measures gradually restricting student’s liberties. The March 20th deadline was moved closer to Monday the 16th without much leeway. The cohort of universities within DePauw’s comparison group were copycats to each other’s actions regarding Covid measures, none wanting to be the black sheep. The campus was a great disturbed anthill, evacuating necessities in great confusion.<br>
<br>
Upon reflection, I have much more sympathy and understanding regarding DePauw’s initiatives. I realize the obligation of social responsibility a university in the midst of an unknown impeding pandemic must sustain in such a moment. The university was looking out for the well-being of others, making such extreme safety precautions a necessity. No one (as far as I know of) got critically ill at DePauw, which is highly reflective of the efforts DePauw instantiated in response to the uncertain situation: this deserves my respect as a student.<br>
<br>
Memories that stuck out in my head around this time:
- Going to Kroger with Quinn on an oblivious adventure  to pick up cards (to write to our friends) and beer. We entered a chaotic scene straight out of a movie: A sea of Greencastle residents frantically stockpiling toilet paper and canned food. 
- Comforting seniors in shock that their last semester was stripped away from them. Having various “graduation” send offs. How the tables turned. 
- Despondent last chapter meeting going over evacuation protocol with the head of the fraternity over the phone. I remember shoving all my possessions of value in a duffle bag.
- A tangible overwhelming dread that depressed many people as they went about wrapping their heads around the immediate change. 
<br>
<br>
In a shocking transformation, DePauw was mobilized and liquidated within a week under a shadow of confused urgency. During this time Quinn was a crucial companion navigating the evolving situation. Quinn agreed to drive Marie and I to Lake Forest. There we spent ~2 days debriefing and attempting to take stock of the situation. Afterwards, Quinn and I made the exodus to Alexandria, VA, with a one night interlude in Columbus, Ohio, Quinn’s previous city of residence.<br>
<br>
It pains me I can’t remember how that drive felt. It must have been quite disorienting, though, I can wager I was soothed by Quinn’s presence as we made that exodus. I remember reading about the virus and trying to ground myself in the literature and prospect the events to come. China was seen as being draconian in its attempts to curtail the spread of Covid. Italy was a grave warning to the rest of the world as its hospitals were becoming inundated. Our own hospitals were seen struggling dealing with the volume of patients; the stories out of NYC were harrowing. Confidence in our government was minimal. This dread poisoned the well of my thoughts. Nonetheless, we arrived in Virginia on March 19th. I was momentarily relieved of the somber atmosphere by delighting in the blooming cherry trees and 60º temperatures. The outer environment nature provided was a great pacifier to my inner environment. The world was battling a novel virus, while I was infected with spring fever.<br>
<br>
This is my recollection of the events subsequent to Covid’s arrival in the U.S.<br>
<br>


I will now describe the disorientation of the rest of the year reflecting on the  sociological and psychological aspects of Covid 19.<br>
<br>
Upon reflection this list represents key hardships that life under Covid was characterized by. This list is arbitrary, the list represents my struggles and actions I implemented in effort to keep me grounded. I am no authority, these wisdoms are rather benign. I was given an opportunity to experience a novel occurrence. One that I saw as a challenge to be won. I wasn’t going to atrophy under the uncertainty of the situation, I was going to thrive and help others.<br>
<br>
### Adjusting to home life from having autonomy as a college student.<br>
<br>
- Sleeping in my childhood bed was both a physical (worn out mattress) and mental adjustment as I tried to make sense of my duties as an adult living in my parent’s home.
- I realized I had to function both as a college student and family member. I achieved a sense of community by cooking dinner for my family, this felt like I was contributing as a son. I instilled a student identity by moving a desk into my room and creating a “work day” schedule for me to mock a college existence. 
- The amount of alcohol I consumed virtually went to zero as I had no desire for it. This had tremendous implications for my health. Oddly, it took a pandemic for me to realize consuming brews 3 times a week was detrimental. 
- Privacy was something that I sought out often while at home. I often went on walks to find solace or used it as an opportunity to call Quinn.
<br>
<br>

### The hyperactive amygdala. The amygdala is a primitive brain structure responsible for survival instincts and plays a key role in the way humans respond to uncertainty
<br> 

- Uncertainty was everywhere!  The news was awfully indirect and promoted fear at every opportunity. A feeling of constant ambiguity was hard to squelch as the message of “flattening the curve” switched to “second wave” talk. Death tolls, # of hospitalizations, celebrities getting sick, lethality of the disease, spread of infection, social distancing… all dreadful terms that eventually became part of everyday life. Most of the news was noise, eliminating certain sensational inputs significantly lowered my cortisol. 
- Uncertainty encourages apathy as hope becomes increasingly difficult to foster in changing circumstances. I remember projecting arbitrary future dates when Covid would be over which eventually amounted to frustration. This practice attenuated over time and lost the same craving for a return to normalcy; I started to aspect the current state of the world. Acceptance and coming to terms with reality was an important step in appropriately dealing with covid, it allowed me to no longer fool myself and become disappointed in hearsay.  I refrained from my situation often by being grateful for God sparing my life more hardship. I had it easy, I wanted to help those that accrued significant loss and hardship.
- Being accountable to someone. It might be strange I’m putting this under the uncertainty category though being responsible for upholding some social contribution is a fulfilling task that can inspire you from giving into boredom and fear. Daily checkups with Quinn encouraged me to be proactive and interesting throughout the day in effort to be able to share my life during our conversations. 
- Scheduling daily objectives. I became obsessed with creating bullet pointed lists containing every action I would do during the day. This exercise gave me a feeling of control over my life that prevented me from having “wasted” a day. 
<br>
<br>
### Craving socialization while respecting the need for social distancing.<br>
<br>
- I hated the instant separation from my friends and previous colleagues, coupled with the inability to get together with people. Group Zoom hangouts provided a veneer of social interaction that ultimately left an even deeper desire for in-person communication with friends and family. I found that I felt less discombobulated by directly calling my close friends and updating each other in a more personal experience that created a greater sense of satisfaction.
- Smile with your eyes. As a masked mug became more normal than abnormal, I realized I was growing depraved of an important aspect of human communication, the smile. A face with a mask poses a great challenge to face-to-face interaction. Being a bagger at a grocery store emphasized that feeling of crowd ambiguity as many people’s personalities hid behind physical masks. I started to realize that the smile could be just as easily conveyed through vocal inflection and with the eyes. You can hear a smile over the phone, how hard is it to see a smile over a mask? I started paying extra attention to my voice and eye contact during masked interactions with customers.
- Besides Revisionist History by Malcom Gladwell, listening to podcasts was a relatively limited activity of mine. Though with some inspiration from Quinn, I started listening consistently to a podcast a day. Secretly, I think I was unconsciously desiring human conversation. I realized I was drawn to podcasts that had a great deal of conversation, usually interview or guest star based formats like The Tim Ferris Show. Listening to human speech patterns, I feel might help with limiting atrophy of our own conversational skills.
- We are all now familiar with the hardship of solitary confinement in one way or another. To alleviate these symptoms, I tried as hard as I could to make one meaningful exchange with someone throughout the day. Whether that be striking up conversation at the grocery store, engaging a parent, talking to a fellow dog walker, whatever. I saw human conversation as currency and tried obtaining as much as possible to stifle my own penchant for being introverted. 
<br>
<br>
### Boredom. <br>
<br>
- I found a job as soon as possible. Upon arriving home in April, I became an essential worker at a local grocery store. I’ll admit that I felt I had to perform some mental gymnastics adjusting myself to being a grocery bagger, however, I quickly gained a grander perspective for work often incorrectly deemed minimal. My fellow workers enlightened me to a grander perception of Covid’s impact on various lives. Working at the grocery store was also a significant source of real signal, not noise, for understanding what changes were happening in everyday life. I got to see a sociological experiment unfold in front of my eyes each day as life adapted to Covid. Hell, people even gave me tips for bagging their groceries out of gratitude for my essential work… ain’t that a funny thing. 
- I can now empathize with the unemployed, the feeling of uselessness and joblessness entertains. And in some ways, uselessness is an entertainment of your thoughts: you are what you pay attention too. Reframing became an important tool in my mental toolkit that helped me coach me through the difficult transition. I was also looking for software development jobs, post graduation. During this time of constant rejection, self talk became an essential skill for correcting myself.
- Daily intentions were prudent in helping me stay on task. I made arbitrary time slots in which I’d do various activities, while seeming silly, “code at 10:00am - 11:00am”, it tricked me into actually initiating a task.
- Exercise. I leaned into my exercise habits heavily during the pandemic. Exercise has many physical health benefits as well as psychological benefits. I often used running as a way to de-fog my head. 
<br>
<br>
And Covid still remains prevalent and will continue to alter the fabric of our social interactions. Vaccinations will change the narrative though we will continue to function in a world recovering from a pandemic with broad pathological, sociological, physiological and psychological components...