---
layout: post
title:  "Consuming Choice"
big_image: ""
date:   2021-04-02 10:01:26 -0600
categories: reflection
tags: [long,reflection, semi academic musings]
---
<br>
I do not claim to be an academic studying behavioral economics or psychology… they are merely a curiosity of mine. I value my purely whimsical learnings for obtaining lenses to better enrich the spectrum of life. Suffice to say, all I want to accomplish is to illuminate a mundane story in an interesting way… such is the gist of science, at least to me that is. <br>
<!--break-->
<br>
Tomorrow is the day I meet a random Stanford student I emailed through Craiglists, after inquiring about their acoustic guitar. After about a month of being estranged from my beat-up Yamaha, I started feeling the acute hunger pangs singling an acute  craving for musical satiation. I’m not much of a guitarist, broader still, I’m nothing akin to musical. Anyone who has ever seen me dance can attest I have neither rhythm or that possessive thing they call soul… and without those two things my music, like my dancing, becomes a careening travesty of constantly shifting melody. I often start with one beat then end up with two beats per quarter; a great salesman I am, doubling my profit. I try to imagine squinting my ears really ‘tightly` and zeroing in on the rhythm being played, “1e&a2e&a3e&a4e”, yet when I go to strum, I get something off kilter. Really, I’m just an average guitar player who likes to spend an hour pretending to be Taylor Goldsmith. Suffice to say, there was enough desire for me to go about combing Craigslist. <br>
<br>
Tomorrow is today: I’ve made the hand off, purple guitar for virtual fiat money, cha-ching. Let me illuminate the proceeding of today’s events and subsequent reanalysis of my decision criteria. I rode a borrowed longboard to our sacred meeting spot, a park within Stanford Campus. Initially, I was surprised my correspondent was a female (Chinese names are hard to infer gender without knowing the characters, I only had pinyin to read), my unconscious biases had auto wired a male as my potential guitar dealer. I believe my brain fell into an availability heuristic bias which states simply the more recent and frequent a correlation is the more you will rely on it in forming assumptions. I had recently only played with male guitar players, minus a few exceptions, whilst living in my fraternity house. Though, wait a minute… I am committing another erroneous oversight: a seller’s wares don’t necessarily correlate with their identity. Many marketers don’t understand nor care about their markets! I know someone who sells cleaning supplies, yet he is not a cleaning fanatic. Thus, it was silly for me to assume my correspondent played the guitar which initially set me up to infer the unfamiliar name to be a males based on an availability heuristic. This was a digression verbosely describing my pervasive little biases that lead to faulty assumptions. Briefly, I think this exercise provides a framework for breaking down future assumptions that my brain generates without my oversight. <br>
<br>
Carrying on, the whole arrangement was kinda awkward. Playing a stranger’s guitar and trying to assess its value within one minute was a new experience for me. However, I was able to glean some information. The strings were new and the sound was pleasantly smooth and a bit buzzy like warm honey, I liked it. In addition to the warm sounding body, the neck was fairly slender and easy to fret. The only kicker, the guitar is this odd purplish color (I now dig it). After bumbling through Blackbird by The Beatles, I put the guitar down and said I was ready to purchase. I then proceeded to drop the ball; I had initially wanted to haggle the price down from $250 to $200, but i Iost the nerve. In fact, I was even offered a softball in the form of an easy opening along the lines of “ is this price ok for that guitar, I don’t know much about the guitar?”, and I waffled by saying something like “yeah seems fair”. FOOL!  I had prepped on my journey over to the park for 20 minutes beforehand thinking of all the ways I could suavely walk down the price! I am embarrassed of myself. Fortunately, I am currently extremely satisfied with my purchase and feel fine with the price…. But, how do I know if I am not just deceiving myself to try and justify the slightly higher expense? <br>
<br>
I feel obliged to address my original intent (providing some sort of analysis) which I have somewhat neglected by getting wrapped up in narrative. I lean on behavioral economics and psychology, in which my only credentials are reading halfway through *Misbehaving: The Making of Behavioral Economics* by Richard Thaler and also some dancing around with the book *Thinking fast and slow* by Daniel Kahneman. Oh yeah and I quickly glanced at this [paper](http://www.wisebrain.org/media/Papers/maximizing.pdf). I’ll be short on detailing why I'm certainly a satisficer.<br>
<br>

The big two, Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, were  critical psychologists in dismantling the belief that humans are rational decision makers. They contributed much to both fields, psychology and behavioral economics, I implore you to read their literature. Back to my limited scope, I was taught in high school economics that a core assumption of economic models was that humans are rational decision makers. A core assumption of economic  models (anything regarding consumer choice) embedded the belief that humans make completely rational choices and maximize utility through complete information. Imagine a computer program doing some sort of optimization algorithm to determine the best solution in an array of options. Research done by Daniel Kahneman, Richard Thaler, and Amos Tversky have vastly ripped apart this tenant of economics. Humans are not rational decision makers nor creatures of optimization.<br>
<br>
> However, some of us get closer to the computer program model than others: 
> maximizers. Maximizers, like the name suggest, seek an optimal solution by 
> investing more thought/energy into mental accounting, optimizing different 
> variables important in making  educated choices: information, number of options, 
> preferences. These are the people who spend a year before a  purchase, like a used 
> car, investigating the Kelly Blue Book and reading old consumer reports to narrow 
> down a field of options, before even embarking on finding vendors and the 
> subsequent further optimization of price. Maximizers derive some joy in the process 
> of finding a deal, but later the exhaustive research in making the original 
> purchase  increases a feeling of regret as reflection raises doubts regarding the 
> superiority of the purchase as new information eventually surfaces.<br>
<br>
Just imagine this scenario involving my pseudonym, Mr Jurgwitz. Back in 2012, Mr Jurgwitz researched half a year for the best new car that maximized his utility and budget. He determined that the Ford Focus was exactly the car that checked all his exhaustive criteria (price, can fit dog?, horsepower, all-wheel drive, gas mileage, trim, interior quality,…) plus it even included a cool new transmission technology called PowerShift transmission. Jurgwitz buys the car and is immediately skeptical of his purchase, but nonetheless he is happy all of 2012. In 2013-2016, after multiple accounts of affected Ford Fiestas and Ford Foci  having crippling transmission problems, news breaks that Ford has knowingly shipped cars off the factory line with faulty transmissions. Jurgwitz realizes his car has a faulty transmission after having an accident in which his car wouldn’t shift up to a higher gear. Jurgwitz couldn’t have predicted this fiasco, yet he blames himself for his now soiled purchase. The woe of the maximizer,all that preparation and thought could not have accounted for a random event. Jurg now needs to soak up a sunk cost,  a whole other blog post can be written about sunk costs later... <br>
<br>
A satisficer on the other hand does not feel accountable for determining an optimal solution, simply a good purchase is fine enough. Faced with multiple options a satisficer will try and determine which product aligns with a few preferences and decide based on current information. This behavior isn’t prone to as much “buyers remorse” compared with maximizing behavior that requires a longer time investment. Satisficers might end up making suboptimal purchases, yet in the long term end up happier. The paper I linked talks in more depth about the ways consumer choice impacts our perceived satisfaction. Simply we can boil it down to a cliche, the tyranny of choice. <br>
<br>
It’s obvious what kind of behavior I display, unfortunately I said I’d somehow combine my guitar purchasing story with behavioral economics, thus I feel compelled to leave this bulleted list. Go out and enjoy the suboptimal. <br>
<br>
At the expense of optimization, I opted for convenience:<br>
- I could have optimized my cash spent by not choosing to buy a “redundant purchase”; I already had a fine guitar at my parent’s house. Simply, I justified buying a new (though used) guitar because shipping required too much logistical overhead than just forking over money for a guitar purchased in my area. 
- I severely limited my options. I used craigslist with a ridiculous  location filter, filtering for guitars  5miles within the Palo Alto area. 
- I did not haggle with the seller for that act would have required more energy and potentially sour the exchange. 
- I now rave about my purple guitar . This is the opposite of buyer’s remorse, though, It might be an unconscious reactive mechanism for defending my purchase.
- I prefer Martins and Taylors, but decided a Fender guitar was good enough. I didn’t go the extra mile to search extensively for a used Martin or Taylor instead opting for what was immediately available. <br>
