---
layout: post
title:  "Comparisons, Aurelius, and Mario Kart"
big_image: ""
date:   2021-04-17 10:02:26 -0600
categories: reflection
tags: [short,reflection, musings]
---
<br>
Comparing oneself to another is the behavior most correlated with someone’s subjective measure of happiness. A major human tendency is to use other people or other people’s things as a reference to how much we value or how much our things value. This reference point then becomes a scalar in which we use to adjust  our perceived happiness. Happiness is commonly defined as our expectations minus reality, which is easily mapped in terms of reference points. People use comparisons to assess their relative skill or ability agianst the population of interest. This method of determining worth based on comparison is entrenched in our society. <!--break--> For example, the acceptance rate of a school is indicative of how selective the institution is, which creates some bar for general intelligence of the student population. Thus, applicants are forced to compare themselves to an average student at university X and assess whether they match the criterium. This action in itself is not unhealthy, though it can become a source of contempt when one attaches value or self worth to the comparison.<br>

<br>
 When I ran track, I exhibited this behavior all the time; constantly using superior athletes as reference points to how fast my times should be. I did not allow myself praise for what I was capable of, my 2:10 800m was disgustingly slow compared to the cream of the crop. And of course it was! I was a walk-on D3 “athlete” who had no right to be comparing himself to a devoted runner that had spent their life training to be a high performant stallion. We are constantly deceiving ourselves with faulty reference points by desiring something others have. This desire leaves us guilty of ignoring how much we have, ironically ignorant that others might be aspiring to be like us in someways.  <br>
<br>
While walking around Half Moon Bay, California, an idea related to this peculiarity popped in my head. Henceforth, I purpose an idea that is an inspired synthesis influenced by Marcus Aurelius, praying to God, and Mario Kart. While listening to an episode of a podcast, [The Stoic Coffee Break](https://open.spotify.com/show/70tDlUjoCZAFqO7cnuspJW?si=Ebz-KudgTbyqCXFmhC9W2A), produced by Eric Cloward, a wonderful quote was unpacked as a lesson in the importance of gratitude. <br>
<br>
<blockquote>“Don’t set your mind on things you don’t possess as if they were yours, but count the blessings you actually possess and think how much you would desire them if they weren’t already yours.” – <em>Marcus Aurelius</em> </blockquote> <br>
<br>
Marcus Aurelius concisely provides wisdom targeted at limiting the scope of our desires. These possesions aren’t purely physical materials they can be our nascent comparisons too. By placing our energies into things we don’t have, we rob our sense of gratitude for the things we already possess. The final clause expresses a cultivation of desire for the things we already have, an act synonymous with gratitude. Related, often Stoicism stresses the foolishness of being attached to ephemeral things, for they are constantly leaving us. The final words of the quote reflect awareness of our transient ownership over things.  <br>
<br>
This idea was familiar to me by virtue of practicing it in prayer. A central tenant of Christianity is a cultivation of gratitude to all that is bestowed upon us [from our creator]. This act is grounding; it centers the world not on our infinite wants, but around the gifts we’ve received.  Sometimes we ride the captain seat of the central agent of the universe for too long without realizing our travesty. Gratitude can rope us back into a reality undistorted by our constant desires problematizing our existence. A constant reminder that all we have is borrowed and eventually we will be returning our body back into dirt, makes for an unsurprisingly humbling experience: a great morning reflection! <br>
<br> 
Sorry to become morose, time to lighten the mood with an analogy formed around time trial (TT) races in Mario Kart. Growing up, I played a lot of Mario Kart Double Dash. I remember finding the time trial racing mode to be frustrating. The TT races allowed you to compete with a ghost racer that was a record of your previous race attempt: you were racing yourself. You were able to see your ghost make the same mistakes you made previously, allowing you to learn. Therefore, what if you tried to only compare yourself to previous or even projected versions of yourself? <br>
<br>
 I think the anguish potentially created from comparisons are inevitable, though they can be attenuated by the reference points we choose to compare ourselves too. If your reference point is you from 2 years ago, you can distinguish precisely your improvements or deteriorations. I guess this is a form of reflection, but abstracted into a  lesson in self improvement. Another track related example, I could literally see my times improving each month, yet I still fell trap to comparing myself to All American athletes, when I should have been happy for the progress I made over the past months. Compared to one month ago Eric ghost, I was much faster. Currently, I am one month into a software development internship, I’ve been finding it helpful to ground my comparisons away from other engineers on the team by looking at how much I’ve grown since starting.  This can work in a corrective manner as well; say you realize that a year ago you were doing far better… well you have a wealth of data (your own experience) for discovering a path back to a happier version of yourself. You can foster a sense of gratitude for what you are capable of doing instead of what others are capable of doing better than you. This is how I see an interplay between gratitude, comparison, and Mario Kart TT ghosts. 
<br>